- Welcome to the Huberman Lab Podcast,
where we discuss science
and science-based tools
for everyday life.
I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm
a professor of neurobiology
and ophthalmology at
Stanford School of Medicine.
This podcast is separate from
my teaching and research roles
at Stanford.
It is however, part of
my desire and effort
to bring zero cost to consumer information
about science and science related tools
to the general public.
In keeping with that theme,
I'd like to thank the
sponsors of today's podcast.
Our first sponsor is InsideTracker.
InsideTracker is a
personalized nutrition platform
that analyzes data from your blood and DNA
to help you better understand your body
and help you reach your health goals.
I've been getting my blood
work done for many years now,
and that's where the simple reason
that only through quality blood work,
and now through the advent of DNA test
can one really get a clear picture
of what's going on with their health.
Things like metabolic
factors and hormones,
all the various triglycerides.
These are things that can only be measured
from a quality blood test.
And now with DNA tests,
you can get an additional window
into your current health status
and the trajectory of your health.
What's really wonderful
about InsideTracker
is that you don't just get numbers back
about the specific levels
of various hormones
and metabolic factors,
you also get a lot of information about
what you could or should do in
order to adjust those numbers
to put you on the course to better health.
So for instance, it will
give recommendations
about particular foods to eat or avoid,
particular exercise regimens
that you might want to adopt
and the frequency of those regimens
in order to move those markers
in the correct direction.
InsideTracker has also added a new feature
that makes tracking your progress
and analyzing your data even easier.
For those of you that use
a Garmin fitness tracker
such as the Garmin watch,
that's now compatible with their platform.
So you can couple your
data from your Garmin
with your blood and DNA for
even more personalization
and insights on your health.
However, if you don't
have a Garmin device,
there's still a lot that you
can get from InsideTracker
and their tests.
If you'd like to try InsideTracker,
you can visit
www.insidetracker.com/huberman.
And if you do that, you'll get 25% off
any of InsideTracker's plans.
Use the code Huberman at checkout,
that's www.insidetracker.com/huberman
to get 25% off any of
InsideTracker's plans
and use the code Huberman at checkout.
Today's podcast is also brought to us
by ExpressVPN.
ExpressVPN is a virtual private network
that keeps your data secure and private.
It does that by routing
your internet activity
through their servers and encrypting it,
so that no one can see or sell your data.
I'm familiar with the effects
of not securing my data
well enough.
A few years back I had
my bank accounts hacked.
I don't know exactly how it
happened, but it happened.
And it was a terrible amount of work
to have that reversed and secured.
The great thing about ExpressVPN
is I don't even notice
that it's running.
I have it on my computer,
I turn it on anytime I work at home
or when traveling or in
a cafe airport anywhere,
and it runs in the background,
it doesn't change anything
about the interface
with my computer or the wifi.
It just secures my data and
it secures any information
about what I happen to be
searching for, et cetera.
I don't feel like I have
anything particular to hide
except my bank account passwords
and things of that sort.
But with ExpressVPN, it basically
makes everything secure,
you can't be tracked and no one can access
or steal your data, which is terrific.
So again, I use it when I'm
traveling and when I'm at home.
If you want to start protecting
your internet activity
using ExpressVPN, you can go
to www.expressvpn.com/huberman
and you'll get an extra three months free
on a one-year package.
That's www.expressvpn.com/huberman
to get three months free
on any of their one-year packages.
Today's podcast is also brought
to us by Athletic Greens.
Athletic Greens is an all-in-one vitamin,
mineral, probiotic drink,
that gives you a total foundation
of vitamins and minerals
and probiotics to support
your health and wellbeing.
I've been using Athletic
Greens since 2012.
And so I'm delighted that
they're sponsoring the podcast.
I started using Athletic Greens
and I still use Athletic
Greens once or twice a day
because it's the simplest
and most straightforward way
to get my basis of
important vitamins, minerals
and probiotic taken care off.
All of those things combined
to support various aspects
of my health,
such as brain health, such as gut health.
For instance, there's a
tremendous amount of evidence now
showing that probiotics support gut health
and that the gut brain access
is important for things like
focus and cognition, as
well as for immune function
and various aspects of physical
health, like metabolism.
The list sort of goes on and on.
With Athletic Greens,
it has all these vitamins and minerals
and various other things
that are good for me,
and I actually really
liked the way it tastes.
So the way I use it is once a day,
sometimes twice a day,
I'll mix it up with water,
I add a little bit of lemon or lime juice.
I think it tastes great without
the lemon or lime juice.
But when I add that, it's
truly delicious to me.
And I'll drink that
first thing in the day,
mid-morning sometimes instead
and sometimes again in
the later afternoon.
I'm able to drink Athletic
Greens late in the day
and not have it keep me awake.
If you want to try Athletic Greens,
you can go to
www.athleticgreens.com/huberman,
and if you do that, you
can claim a special offer.
They'll give you five free travel packs,
which make mixing up Athletic Greens
while you're on the road,
really simple and easy.
And they'll give you a year
supply of vitamin D3+K2.
Vitamin D3, as many of you know,
you can get from the sun,
but many people even if
they're already getting
a lot of sun exposure,
still have vitamin D3
levels that are too low.
And vitamin D3 is very important
for a huge number of
cardiovascular, immune,
metabolic and other aspects of health.
So once again, if you go to
www.athleticgreens.com/huberman,
you'll get the five travel packs
and a year supply of vitamin D3+K2.
Today is the third episode
in our series of episodes
about physical and
athletic skill performance
and skill learning in general.
And today we're going to talk
about the science of tools
for fat loss.
And fat loss is something
that interests a large number of people.
Many people want to lose fat,
many people are athletes
who need to lose fat.
And in general, we know that
having body fat percentages
that are too high is unhealthy for us.
And most people struggle to lose fat.
Most people struggled to
lose weight generally,
but most people especially
struggled to lose body fat
or what we call adipose tissue.
Now, this is a huge topic on the internet.
There's a lot of controversy.
Today, we're going to
talk about some things
related to fat loss,
and that are powerful for fat loss
that I'm guessing most of you
have never heard about before.
You may have heard about a few of them,
but I'm guessing you haven't
heard about all of them.
This episode is going to be
rich with science-based tools
that are gleaned from a variety of aspects
of the literature,
including the use of cold,
including brown fat,
including something called beige fat.
We're going to talk about
something called NEAT.
We're going to talk about all
sorts of aspects of fat loss
that are governed by your nervous system.
And this is I think an important gap
that's missing in the
discussion about fat loss.
You can hear a lot of
information out there
about the role of things like insulin
and various diets like ketogenic diets
or vegan diets or Mediterranean diets.
And there's some great stuff out there,
and there's some really
terrible information out there,
and there's a lot of controversy.
We did a number of episodes talking
about the role of hormones on metabolism
and the role of food
on mood and wellbeing.
So if you're interested in those topics,
please check them out.
I will touch a little
bit on hormones today.
Things like insulin and
leptin, just a little bit.
But today's episode is mainly
going to be focused on,
how the nervous system, neurons,
and some of the cells
they collaborate with,
like glioma and macrophages,
how those encourage or can
encourage accelerated fat loss.
Because it turns out they can.
Remember your nervous system
which includes your brain
and your spinal cord
and all the connections
that they make with
the organs of the body,
governs everything.
It's the on switch and the
off switch for immune system.
It's the on switch and the off switch.
It turns out also for fat burning.
And so the nervous system
and the role of the brain
and other neurons has
been vastly overlooked
in the discussion about losing fat.
Now, I would be remiss
and I'd probably come under
a pretty considerable attack,
if I didn't just acknowledge upfront
a core truth of metabolic science
and also of neuroscience, frankly,
which is that calories
in versus calories out,
meaning how many calories you ingest,
versus how many calories you burn
is the fundamental and
most important formula
in this business of fat loss
and weight management in general.
There's simply no way around the fact
that if you ingest far more
calories than you burn,
you're likely to gain weight.
And a good portion of that weight
is likely to be adipose tissue fat.
It's also true that if
you ingest fewer calories
than you burn,
that you will lose weight,
and that a significant portion
of that will come from body fat.
What portion?
Depends on a number of factors.
But that simple formula is important.
On a previous episode, I
mentioned the complications
with the statements of
a calorie is a calorie.
And indeed there is
evidence from for instance
Robert Lustig, who's a
pediatric endocrinologist
at UC San Francisco has talked
about how highly processed
foods change the way
that we utilize food,
and can lead to higher
incidences of obesity
and other metabolic syndromes
that go against the idea
that a calorie is a calorie and that's it.
So a calorie is a calorie
as a unit of energy,
and we need to accept and
acknowledge this calories in,
meaning calories ingested
versus calories burned formula.
But the calories burn portion
is strongly influenced
by a number of things that you can control
that can greatly accelerate
or increase the amount of adipose tissue
or the proportion of adipose tissue
that you burn in response
to exercise and food.
So your hormones are important.
Your thermogenic milieu,
meaning how warm or how cold your body is?
How cold you make it,
how warm you make it?
But also your level of metabolism.
Your levels of thyroid hormone
and something that's
hardly ever discussed,
but is well supported by
the scientific literature,
how much innervation?
Meaning how much connectivity there is,
between your nervous system and fat.
Today, we're going to talk about the fact
that your body fat of various kinds,
and there are several kinds of body fat
are actually innervated by neurons.
Neurons connect to your body fat
and can change the probability
that that body fat will be burned or not.
So your nervous system
is the master controller
of this process,
and it plays a strong
role in the calories out,
the calories burned component.
So as usual, we're going to
discuss a little bit of science.
I promise I won't go
too deep into lipolysis
and all sorts of things
related to fat oxidation.
We're going to break down that process
into two important steps.
And if you can understand
those two important steps
then the rest of the tools
will be very straightforward
to understand and manage.
And I do believe that
today you will walk away
with many new tools that
you could incorporate
into any kind of fat loss regimen
that will greatly accelerate that process,
because it's grounded in
quality peer-reviewed science.
Throughout the episode,
I'm going to talk about
some behavioral tools.
In fact, I'll mostly talk
about behavioral tools.
I will also talk about
compound, supplements.
Many of you are into supplements.
Some of you aren't, and that's fine.
For those of you that
are into supplements,
an important issue in a
discussion about supplements
for fat loss or otherwise
is going to be the quality
of those supplements and the accuracy
about what's in those
supplement bottles and tablets,
et cetera.
I usually mention this at
the end of the podcast,
but this podcast we've partnered
with Thorne, T-H-O-R-N-E.
Because Thorne we believe
has the highest levels
of stringency in terms of
the quality of the compounds
in their supplements and the
amounts of those compounds.
If you want to see the supplements I take,
you can go to www.thorne.com/u/huberman.
You can see the supplements that I take,
that will also allow you to get 20% off
any of those supplements,
or 20% off any of the other
supplements that Thorne makes.
Thorne has partnered with the Mayo Clinic
and all the major sports teams.
So there's a very strong
basis for their stringency.
Again, you don't need to use supplements.
I'm certainly not encouraging
anyone to use supplements
if that's not your thing,
but if you're going to use supplements,
make sure that your supplement source
is one a very high quality.
With that said, I want to get started
and talk about the
various tools for fat loss
and how neuroscience,
neurons control fat loss.
Before I do that,
I want to set the context correctly
and extract some of the key takeaways
from previous episodes,
because if your foundation of health
and your foundation of hormones
and your foundation of
metabolism isn't right,
it's going to be very hard to get the most
out of any kind of exercise
or fat loss protocol.
In previous episodes, I
talked all about the science
and the details going
into particular protocols.
We don't have time to do that now,
and I want to get to the new material.
However, there are a couple bins,
a couple items that you should make sure
you're getting correctly.
And if you're not perfect about
these, don't worry about it,
most people are not perfect about them,
I'm certainly not perfect about them.
But we should all be
striving to get quality
and sufficient sleep.
I did four full episodes on sleep
and how to get better at sleeping
through things like light
exposure, temperature,
timing your sleep correctly
for your so-called chronotype,
if you're a night owl or a morning person.
That's the first four
or I think five episodes
of the Huberman Lab Podcast.
Get your sleep right,
get your light exposure right,
avoid bright light in your eyes
at times you wanted to be asleep,
and get bright light in your eyes
at times you want to be awake.
So get your sleep right.
The other thing is essential fatty acids.
I talked about this in
the food and mood episode,
but I also talked about it
during the hormones episodes.
We need fatty acids.
They are vital to so many
aspects of our health.
You don't have to get
them from supplements.
You can, if you want to,
but you need to get them from your food.
They are essential.
There's a reason there's an
E the essential part there.
Of the fatty acids,
there are multiple kinds,
but for the antidepressant effects
where the levels of fatty acids
that will promote good mood
and also healthy metabolism
and we'll start to shift the
needle in the right direction
on bloodborne cardiovascular factors.
The key thing is to get the levels of EPA
that you ingest above
1000 milligrams per day.
So that doesn't mean just
taking a thousand milligrams
or more of say fish oil or krill oil
or whatever your preferred source is.
It means getting above a
thousand milligrams of EPA
which may require that you
ingest more essential fatty acids
than just a thousand milligrams per day.
That of course can be
done through food sources,
things like fatty fish,
or if you're not into eating fish,
you've quality meats that
are grass raised can do that.
There are other sources
of essential fatty acids,
of course also from plant sources.
So look, those up online.
It's really easy to find.
But the research and the literature shows
that you want to get above
a thousand milligrams
of EPA per day,
because that's when you can
best support your metabolism
and position yourself for good fat loss.
As well for people who
have cravings issues,
they crave sweets all the time,
I talked about this in
the gut-brain episode
and hormones and food.
That you have neurons in
your gut that are craving,
they're seeking essential fatty acids
and they're craving and seeking
amino acids from your food.
Now, these are not supplements
that they crave per se,
they're craving those things
because that's what your body
needs and your brain needs.
But those same neurons
will respond to sugars.
And so many people who are craving sugar
can satisfy that sugar
craving by giving the neurons
so to speak what they actually want,
which are amino acids and
essential fatty acids.
That includes EPA, but
also things like glutamine
and amino acid that can
really reduce sugar cravings
if you take a teaspoon of that,
or even a tablespoon of
that a few times a day.
You have to ease into that a little bit,
because some people can get
a little bit of GI distress
from too much glutamine.
But glutamine has also been
shown to improve symptoms
of leaky gut.
It's a powerful amino acid.
And yes, you can also get it from food.
Things like cottage cheese are
high in glutamine, et cetera.
And then finally you can't
really position yourself
to have a strong metabolism
if your iodine levels
aren't correct,
and your thyroid levels aren't correct.
You can overdo iodine.
So you don't want to do that.
A lot of table salt
has iodine added to it,
but some people need to add iodine,
by ingesting things like kelp, et cetera..
But one of the best ways to
support the thyroid system
and metabolism in general,
is to make sure you're
getting enough selenium.
Sometimes called selenium each day.
Simple way to do that is to ingest
the highest concentration of selenium food
that I'm aware of, which is Brazil nuts,
one or two or three of those per day.
You'll have more than enough selenium
to meet the thyroid needs.
You don't want your
selenium to be too high,
you don't want a diet
too high in anything.
So again, sleep, sufficient EPAs,
glutamine if you have
issues with leaky gut
or sugar cravings can really help.
Get your gut microbiome, right?
I may have missed saying that,
but get your gut microbiome right.
That does not necessarily mean
you need to ingest probiotics.
You can, if you want to,
but you can also just
simply ingest a serving
or two of fermented foods per day,
that can greatly assess.
So things like sauerkraut, kimchi,
every culture has a different source
or sources of fermented foods,
those can really help the gut microbiome,
and then make sure that
your thyroid hormone
is supported through the ingestion
of sufficient iodine not too much
and sufficient selenium, not too much.
Okay?
Sleep, EPA, glutamine, fermented foods,
iodine and selenium.
That sets the basis for how things
like exercise, cold and
some of the compounds
and other things that we're
going to talk about today
that are I'm guessing going
to be truly new to many of you
that can really increase the
burn factor in the equation
of calories in versus calories burned.
Okay?
So on the one hand we have
this reality of calories in,
versus calories burned.
However, I would also be
remiss if I didn't mention
an incredible study that
was done by my colleague,
Alia Crum at Stanford.
She's a faculty member,
professor in the psychology department.
Looking at how belief affects,
just thinking can impact
the effects of things
like exercise on weight loss.
These are just incredible results.
What they did was they took subjects
who were hotel service people
that would clean the hotels
and come in and change
the linens and so forth.
Divide them into two groups.
One group, they were told moving around
and doing your duties for your job,
meet the standards for US
guidelines for activity
and movement, et cetera.
And a basic lecture about how movement
is good for you, et cetera.
But mostly just that
their daily activities
met the standards for the US.
The other group, however, was
given a bunch of information
about how movement and their daily routine
was very good for cardiovascular health,
it could be good for
weight loss, et cetera.
And then they tracked these subjects
over a period of many weeks.
The take home message from this study
was that simply being told
that movement is good for you
can lead to weight loss, et cetera.
Led to significantly more body fat loss,
waist-to-hip ratio
changes in the direction
that most people would want.
But essentially a slimming
down, if you will.
And all sorts of other positive effects
on things like cardiovascular health.
Simply by the knowledge
that movement and exercise
can help various health markers.
So this is remarkable and it speaks
to the power of the nervous system
and the power of belief in
governing aspects of our body
and our physiology that
one would otherwise think
we're outside our conscious control.
Now, of course, any of you
that think scientifically
which I imagine if you watch this podcast
or listen to this podcast
is all of you by now
probably thinking,
well, maybe they just moved around more,
or maybe they stood up and sat down more,
maybe they did something
else that was different.
And indeed there's a strong possibility
that they did things differently
than the other group,
but the mere knowledge that
exercise is good for you,
that movement is good for you,
shifted their behavior
and their physiology
in the direction of enhanced weight loss,
fat loss, et cetera.
So how we think about a
given set of activities
affects how we perform those activities.
And how we think about and
perform those activities
has a real effect on our physiology.
So somewhere between
the hard and fast rule
that governs fat loss and weight loss,
which is if you ingest more
calories than you burn,
you'll either maintain or gain weight.
Typically, you'll gain weight,
although not always.
If you ingest about as
many calories as you burn,
you'll maintain weight, typically.
And if you ingest fewer
calories than you burn,
typically you'll lose weight.
That's the kind of rule of fat loss.
And yet we also have these
belief effects which show,
and this has been
replicated again and again,
that how we think about a process,
whether or not we think it's beneficial
can change our physiology in ways
that can be beneficial to us.
Somewhere in between those two extremes
of hardcore metabolic science
and belief of why a bunch of protocols
that are grounded in quality
peer-reviewed science
and in physiology that you can leverage
to increase the rates of fat loss.
And so that's what we're
going to talk about today.
I love this topic and it's not
that I'm so obsessed with fat loss,
but rather the first the project
I ever worked on in science
was thermogenesis and fat loss.
I joined a laboratory as an undergraduate,
and the guy I worked for
loved to explore new compounds
and how they impacted thermogenesis.
And so we looked at how
things like MDMA/Ecstasy,
how antipsychotics, antidepressants,
various weight loss drugs
that were on the market.
How those impacted body temperature
and fat loss and metabolism?
And we just had so much fun doing it.
So if you detect a smile on my face,
that's what that's about.
And I also learned a lot,
and I also came to really appreciate
that this tissue of our bodies,
adipose tissue and fat,
we think of as just this unfortunate thing
that's like we're told
it's a core energy source
if we ever entered a famine
and that's all true, et cetera.
You come to realize that
the cells in our body,
they are there as fuel for
the furnace of our body,
which is our metabolism.
And there's a third player.
And that's where it
really gets interesting.
That the nervous system,
neurons has the opportunity
to turn up the intensity of that furnace.
It has the opportunity to
increase the amount of heat
that we produce and therefore
the amount of energy
that we burn.
And I was also really intrigued
by something which is that,
growing up, I think we all know people
who can eat a tone and never
seem to gain any body fat.
Or people who seem to eat very little
and seem to gain body fat very easily.
And I was always intrigued by that.
And it turns out there are a
number of different factors
that relate to that.
But the nervous system is the one
that we can really control.
Both through behaviors and what we eat,
but also in terms of this thing
that we call thermogenesis.
There was one particular
story I want to relate to,
that does not suggest any protocol.
In fact, I'm going to discourage you
from following this protocol.
Please do not try the compound
that I'm about to describe.
One of the favorite things
that we like to do in that lab
was to find rare compounds and test them.
And at the time I was
reading about thermogenesis
and I learned about a compound
that was actually discovered
in the armory factories
of World War II.
And it was discovered
because women in particular
who were working in these factories
would take a brush and
dip it in a compound
or a paint rather,
and they would then paint
the numbers with a stencil
onto things like bombs and
ammunition of various kinds.
And they were losing weight like crazy.
It turns out that occasionally
they'd lick the brush,
and then they would go back
just to get a sharper point
on the brush,
and then they would paint
onto these various bullets
and missiles and so forth.
Bombs and so forth.
And they started shedding
all their body fat.
And many of them losed, excuse
me, lost a lot of weight,
a significant portion of their weight
without changing anything
else that they were doing,
what they were eating, et cetera.
It turned out that that compound
is something called Dinitrophenol, DNP.
And over the years Dinatrophenol,
DNP has gained popularity
in some niche cultures,
mainly bodybuilders, athletes
even in the modeling industry.
It is a absolutely terrible
compound for anyone to use,
because it's highly fatal
if your body temperature
goes too high.
Hyperthermia will kill you.
And indeed many people have
died using Dinatrophenol
as a weight loss drug or attempting
to use it as a weight loss drug.
But Dinitophenol really
illustrates a principle
which is that your
metabolism includes things
like thyroid hormone and
growth hormone, et cetera.
But your body temperature
and the way you utilize energy
is controlled by your nervous system.
And the way Dinatrophenol works
is by changing the neurons
and the way that the
neurons that connect to fat
change the way fat burns up.
So we are not going to suggest,
I am not suggesting that
you use Dinatrophenol.
However, there are other things
that you can do that can
change the relationship
between these neurons
and the fat of your body
in ways that can powerfully
accelerate fat loss.
And I don't know why we don't
hear about these things more,
but probably because most of what you see
out there on the internet focuses
more on what you could eat and should eat
or shouldn't eat.
It concentrates on exercise regimens
which we will also talk about.
But the burn factor,
your thermogenic
environment is one of the,
if not the most important factors
in this business of fat loss.
And since I'm a neuroscientist
that's what we're going to talk about.
So let's talk about fat utilization.
Let's talk about how fat
is converted into energy
which is sometimes also
called fat burning.
What I'd like you to know
is that this is a two-part process.
Okay?
In reality, there are
many biochemical steps.
And if you log onto the internet,
or you open up a textbook
and you want to learn about
fat utilization,
you're going to see a lot of chemistry.
And I'm happy to go deep into
that chemistry if you like.
But I think most of you
are probably interested
in what are the leverage points?
Where can you exert control
over this process in ways
that benefit you?
So I'm going to focus mainly on those.
Okay?
This is not to upset the aficionados
and I will put in some
nomenclature, but here we go.
There's two parts to this process.
One, is fat mobilization.
And the second is fat
oxidation or utilization.
Okay?
So the first thing that
has to happen for body fat
to get burned up or used and reduced
is that it has to get mobilized.
And that's a process called lipolysis,
but I actually don't care if
you know the name lipolysis,
you just have to move that
fat out of the position
that it's in.
You have to get it out of the fat cells.
All right?
Fat cells can be visceral
around our visceral organs
or they can be subcutaneous
under our skin.
Most people are thinking
about subcutaneous fat
when they think about fat.
So here's the deal.
And if you want more detail,
great, I'll touch on that in a bit.
But basically stored fat has two parts
that are relevant here.
It's got the fatty acid part,
and that's the part
that your body can use.
And that's attached to
something called glycerol
and they're linked by a backbone.
So already, probably too much
chemistry for both of you.
But what you want is you
want to break the backbone.
So if you just can
remember to mobilize fat,
you got to break the backbone
between glycerol and these fatty acids.
Okay?
That's accomplished by
an enzyme called lipase,
but you can forget all that if you want.
Remember, we're just
trying to mobilize fat.
So the first step is to
get those fatty acids
moving around in the bloodstream
to get them out of those fat cells.
And then they can travel
and be used for energy.
And that second part,
remember first part is mobilization.
The second part is oxidation.
Is then those fatty acids,
those are potential fuel.
They're just potential fuel,
but you haven't burned the fat yet,
you've just moved it
out of your fat cells.
They're going to go into cells
that can use them for energy.
And once they are inside those cells,
they're still not burned up.
You need to oxidize them.
Think oxidation is the burnup part.
They need to be moved
into the mitochondria
and then they can be converted
into ATP into energy.
So just to really zoom
out again to make sure
I don't lose anybody.
You got to mobilize the fat,
then you have to oxidize the fat.
In other words, you have to mobilize it,
then you actually have to
convert it into energy.
If you just mobilize it,
and you don't convert it into energy,
you don't oxidize it,
it can be returned to body fat.
And many of the things that
the nervous system can do,
is to increase the mobilization of fat,
but also the oxidation of fat.
Okay?
So you have two opportunities
to burn more fat,
and both of those
opportunities are governed
by your nervous system.
By neurons that literally
send little wires
that we call axons into
fat and release chemicals
that provide a stimulus
for more of that fat
to be mobilized,
and then later for more of
that fat to be burned up.
Okay?
So we could go really deep on this,
but I'm not going to go
much deeper than that,
because this isn't a biochemistry
of fatty acid metabolism lecture.
This is about how to burn fat
using your nervous system.
But remember, there's a mobilization step,
and then there's an oxidation step.
I think anyone of you,
all of you should be
able to internalize that.
Mobilize then oxidize.
Okay?
So what are these neurons
that connect a fat doing?
What are they releasing exactly?
How do they actually
increase fat mobilization?
And how do they increase fat oxidation?
Burning of fat.
Well, there are a couple
of things that they release
that encourage that process.
And the main one that you need
to know about is epinephrine
or adrenaline.
The conversion of these
fatty acids into ATP
in the mitochondria of cells
is favored by adrenaline.
Okay?
And adrenaline is
released from two sources.
Adrenaline is released
from the adrenal glands,
which set a top our
kidneys and our lower back.
And it's also released
from the so-called
sympathetic nervous system.
Although that name is a bit of a misnomer,
because it has nothing
to do with sympathy,
has to do with stimulating alertness
and promoting action of the body.
There's a big mistake in the literature
that is finally being
corrected among those who know.
The mistake in the literature
is that the adrenal glands
and the release of adrenaline
is what stimulates fat loss
and fat oxidation.
In fact, it was thought for a long time
that adrenaline swimming
around in your body
of when you're fasted,
because fasting can increase adrenaline
or when you're engaging
in intense exercise
or when you're stressed is
going to promote fat oxidation.
That's actually not the case.
The adrenaline that
stimulates fat oxidation,
the burning of fat is coming from neurons
that actually connect to the fat,
not hormones like adrenaline
that are swimming around
in your system.
It's a local process.
And this is very important
because it means that,
what you do, the specific
patterns of movements
and the specific environment you create
that can stimulate these
particular neurons to activate fat,
meaning to release fat,
to mobilize it and then to burn it,
is going to be a powerful
lever that you can use
in order to increase fat loss.
So what have we said so far?
We've said that you've got to
mobilize and you got to burn fat
and that your nervous system
is in control of that process.
It's not just about calorie deficit.
Okay, so let's talk about how to activate
the nervous system in
ways that it promotes
more liberation, movement,
mobilization of fat
and more oxidation of fat.
So one of the most powerful
ways to stimulate epinephrin
which is also called
adrenaline from these neurons
that connect to fat and
to thereby stimulate
more fat mobilization and
oxidation is through movement.
But I'm not talking about exercise.
The type of movement
that I'm referring to,
is extremely subtle.
And some of you may be familiar
with this type of movement,
but I'm guessing you're
probably not familiar
with what I'm about to tell you,
which is that shiver or
shivering is a strong stimulus
for the release of adrenaline
epinephrin into fat
and the increase in fat
oxidation and mobilization.
But shiver is not just induced by cold,
and there are other
subtle forms of movement
that can greatly increase
fat metabolism and fat loss.
There was a group in England
during the 1960s and 70s
that discovered a pathway by
which subtle forms of movement
can greatly increase fat loss.
This is the work of Rothwell and Stock.
It's very famous in the
thermogenesis literature.
And I learned about this early on,
when I was an undergraduate and I asked,
how did they come across this?
And here's how the story goes.
They were aware that some people overeat
and yet don't put on weight.
Other people overeat
even just a little bit
and they seem to accumulate
extra adipose tissue.
Now, this is long before
all the discussions
about microbiome and
hormone factors, you know
it was long before many
of the hormone factors
besides insulin had even been discovered.
What they did was they
examined people who overate
and did not gain weight.
And what they observed was
that those people engaged
in lots of subtle movement
throughout the day.
In other words, they were fidgeters.
And that's what they call them.
I'm not going to do the British
accent version of fidgeters.
But Roth and Stock were British.
What they found were people that overeat
but don't gain weight as a consequence.
And in fact, many people who
had low levels of body fat
had a lot of resting tremor,
not of the Parkinsonian type,
but they would bounce their
knee while they were sitting,
when they would talk,
they would engage in
very angular movements,
they were sort of electric.
In fact, now in science,
I was chuckling about
this as I was diving back
into this literature,
because the other day I
heard a wonderful lecture
on a totally different topic
from a colleague of mine
and we all adore him.
He's over in Europe
and he's this tremendously
successful scientist.
So we like to poke fun at him.
And every one of his movements
is incredibly electric
and staccato.
And he's rail thin and
he eats like a horse.
And so it fits very
well into the discovery
of Rothwell and Stock who discovered
that fidgeters people
that bounce their knee,
people that have a head bob
while they're listening,
people that nod a lot,
people that stand up and sit
down a lot throughout the day,
and people that pace
burn anywhere from 800
to 2,500 calories more
than the control group
in the experiments that they looked at.
And indeed, there's been a
modern look into all this,
and these numbers check out
that simply moving around a lot,
even if those are subtle movements,
greatly increases the amount
of energy that you burn.
And people who overeat,
the people who can have the
second or the third doughnut
or doughnuts at all and
don't seem to put on weight
to the same degree,
they are people that move
around a lot even when seated.
They're are people that
will often move their limbs
very quickly as well.
There even have been studies
that have explored other things
that correlate with fidgeters.
Fidgeters stand up very
quickly at the end of a lecture
or they start to gather
their things very quickly,
whereas non fidgeters don't.
So dogs like my bulldog Costello,
definitely not a fidgeter.
Every movement is incredibly
slow and deliberate.
Sitting down as a process,
if you ask him to sit down
and sort of a slow motion.
You ask him to get up
and he kind of looks at
you sighs and stands up.
The fidgeter is the
opposite of that, right?
You say, how are you doing?
They go, great.
So even sometimes their
speech will be accelerated
although not always.
But staccato movements,
fidgeting, et cetera.
And in 2015, and again in 2017,
there've been studies
that have explored this,
using some modern metabolic tracking
and indeed simply moving a lot,
being a fidgeter, bouncing your knee,
standing up and pacing several times
or many times throughout the day
led to considerable amounts
of fat loss and weight loss
when people were ingesting
the same amount of food,
if they overate, they
were able to compensate
and burn off that food.
And if they were trying to lose weight
and they incorporated
this fidgeting protocol
of deliberately trying to fidget more
and move around during the day,
pace, stand up more quickly,
sit down more often,
sit down and stand up more often rather.
They found that they greatly
increased their weight loss
anywhere from 20 to 30% increases.
And in some cases, you know,
there always those few people
who burned a lot more.
It seems to work best in people
who are already slightly overweight.
So for people that are overweight,
who are kind of averse to exercise,
fidgeting might actually
be a good entry point.
And 800 to 2,500 calories
is a considerable amount
of calories when you
really think about it.
Now, why am I telling you this?
Well, there's clearly a
tool to export from this,
which is that you can increase
the amount of calories burned
without having to go on
additional long runs.
I do hope that people
are exercising regularly
because it's so important
for other aspects of brain
and body health.
But nonetheless, we are all time limited
and we are not all so
ready to embrace exercise.
I have a family member
who has been slowly coaxed
into exercise,
but if I were to tell her, for instance,
you need to fidget more,
she'd probably go for it.
So this is a powerful way
to increase the calories
that are burned.
Now, that's great.
And you can think about the protocols.
But I want to nest that protocol
in what I said before,
which is that, fat is
controlled by these neurons
and the epinephrin they release.
You might say, well, how could
these little micro movements
lead to so much caloric burn?
And that's where it
really gets interesting.
Rothwell and Stock and
others that they worked with,
subsequently found that these
little fidgety movements,
the engagement of certain
aspects of our musculature
that are nothing like exercise.
It's not these large coordinated
or rhythmic body movements,
but rather subtle little
bits of fidgety movement.
And here I am doing a lot of
fidgety movement as an example,
tapping the pen, this kind of thing.
I was probably that kid
in class most of the time.
And I was like, I try not
to do it to irritate people,
but I was definitely a knee bouncer.
I'm not particularly lean or not.
But I was definitely...
This is a common activity for me.
People that do that sort of thing,
it turns out that it's not
the kind of caloric burn
that we normally think of,
of like, oh, you'll
running, lifting weights,
swimming, yoga, et cetera.
Those subtle movements
of our core musculature,
not just the core, but all our limbs
and our musculature,
those low level movements,
they trigger epinephrin
release from these neurons,
and they stimulate the
mobilization of fat.
And then that fat is
oxidized at higher rates.
And I find this fascinating.
I wish more people knew about it,
which is why I'm telling
you about it today.
This has nothing to do with exercise
in the traditional form,
and yet 800 to 2,500 calories per day.
That's a considerable
amount of fat oxidized.
If you are in a calorie maintenance mode
or if you're sub caloric,
that's going to add to it
still additional fat loss.
The data on this are tremendous.
I'll link to a few studies.
If you're really interested in learning
about what's called neat.
N-E-A-T which is non-exercise
activity thermogenesis.
NEAT.
So what's the protocol?
Fidget.
If you're really interested
in burning calories
and you already exercise,
you want to burn more
or you don't have the
opportunity to exercise
or you're averse to exercise
for whatever reason,
fidgeting, movements, staccato movement,
standing up, walking around, pacing,
all the sort of nervous activities
that were so critical of other people
and sometimes in ourselves
are actually mobilizing and oxidizing
a lot of fat and a lot of energy.
And while this probably won't compensate
for chronic overeating,
the caloric burn from
this is considerable,
and very likely can offset a meal
that had excessive calories
or a kind of steady
state of eating too much.
And it also starts to open
up all sorts of thoughts
and discussion about when you travel,
you tend to eat foods
that are kind of outside
your normal ones.
We tend to eat foods that
aren't so great for us,
we also tend to be a
little bit more sedentary
when we travel we're on
the plane, et cetera.
But all of that aside,
just the use of something
like low-level movement.
And it's almost like a tremor,
but also these select short,
small fidgety movements.
I'm intentionally doing
a lot of these today.
So you have examples that you can use
to select from if you like.
These can have a major effect on fat loss
and it raises a second tool.
If these low, meaning
these small movements
that we engage in trigger
epinephrin adrenaline release
from these neurons of the
sympathetic nervous system
that innervate fat and increase
fat mobilization and oxidation.
Now, it should make sense why shivering
is one of the strongest stimuli
that one can incorporate
to stimulate fat loss.
Now, shivering is almost
always associated with cold.
We think shivering, we think cold,
because when we get cold, we shiver.
And there are two ways that
shivering can increase fat loss.
And there are several ways
that you can use shivering,
you can leverage shivering
and you can leverage cold
to accelerate fat loss.
But you have to do it correctly.
And most of the people that are using cold
and frankly suggesting cold
as a means to increase metabolism fat loss
are suggesting the exact wrong protocol.
In fact, the one I'm going
to recommend is 180 degrees
in the opposite direction
to the typical protocol
that you'd hear about.
So let's talk about how to use cold
and how to leverage shiver as
a particularly strong stimulus
to increase fat loss through
mobilization and oxidation
of these fatty acids.
So in recent years there's
been a growing interest
in the use of cold for
various things like,
improving stress tolerance,
improving metabolism,
recovery from exercise.
I've talked about a number of those things
and the uses of cold on this podcast.
In fact, did an episode on
how to supercharge performance
through palmer cooling, cooling the palms
in specific ways or the
bottoms of the feet.
And if you're interested in that,
and how to improve performance
in endurance and strength,
you can check out that episode.
But most people out there
are using cold exposure
typically by taking cold showers
or by getting into cold
water of some other kind,
a lake or a river or a
cold bath or an ice bath.
And they are doing that
probably with mixed goals,
meaning they both would like
to increase their metabolism
and burn fat, as well as
improve mental resilience.
Since today, we're talking
about accelerating fat loss
through the use of science-based tools.
I want to emphasize a study
that was published in nature
just a couple of years ago,
showing exactly how cold
increases metabolism and fat loss.
Okay?
So we have several kinds of fat.
Three kinds in fact.
We have white fat, white adipose tissue,
and we have brown fat
or brown adipose tissue.
And there's a third kind
which is beige adipose tissue.
White fat is the type
that we traditionally
think of as fat, subcutaneous fat.
And it is not particularly
rich in mitochondria.
It is there as an energy storage site
and we have to mobilize the fat out
as we talked about before
and burn it up elsewhere.
Brown fat largely exists
between our shoulder blades
and on the back of our
neck, between the scapulae.
And it's rich with mitochondria
which is why it's called brown fat.
And brown fat has a
particular biochemical cascade
whereby it can take food energy,
it can take food, basically,
break it down and convert it
into energy within those cells.
And there's some
additional steps involved,
but unlike fatty acids from white fat
which have to travel elsewhere
get broken down in mitochondria
and convert into ATP, et cetera.
Used by the mitochondria rather.
Brown fat is thermogenic.
It can actually use energy directly.
It skips a step, and I
don't want to get diverted
by going into all the biochemistry of it.
Beige fat is sort of in between.
It's white fat that could be brown fat,
because it has some mitochondria in it,
but not as many as brown fat.
Now, cold exposure does several things.
Making ourselves cold
can allow us to build up
mental resilience because
getting into cold of any kind,
doesn't matter if it's a cryochamber,
doesn't matter if it's a cold day
and you forgot your sweater or your parka.
It doesn't matter if it's an ice bath
or you're lying down in the snow.
Cold causes the release of
adrenaline from your adrenals.
And it causes the release of epinephrin
from these neurons that connect to fat.
Now, the big effects of cold on metabolism
and fat burning are going
to be through two routes.
One, is that if you
expose yourself to cold,
you have the opportunity to
trigger activation of brown fat
as well as to convert more
beige fat into true brown fat.
So you essentially create a
stronger or a hotter furnace.
That's the way to think about brown fat.
It's like a furnace.
And so with this principle
that we started with a calories
in versus calories burned.
What you're doing is you're
increasing the amount
of burning,
you're increasing the burn of energy
by increasing the intensity
of the heat inside you
so to speak.
Okay?
I'm talking here kind of metaphorically.
Now, how can you do that?
Well, if you get into cold water
or an ice bath or a cold day,
and you try and remain
calm and resist shivering,
you actually short circuit
this mechanism for increasing
brown fat thermogenesis.
The paper published in nature shows
that it is shivering itself
that causes the brown fat
to increase your burning,
your burn rate and your metabolism.
And it works like this,
when you get into cold and you shiver,
the shivering that low level
movement of the muscle,
those small movements triggers
the release of a molecule
called succinate.
S-U-C-C-I-N-A-T-E, succinate.
And succinate acts on the brown fat
to increase brown fat thermogenesis
and fat burning overall.
It actually increases body heat
through this brown fat
thermogenesis pathway.
And it also over time can
increase the amount of brown fat
by converting beige fat
into true brown fat.
Now, how much cold exposure and how often?
That's the key.
But before I give that
detail or set of details.
Remember if you resist the shiver,
you are not going to get the
increased metabolic effect,
because you are not going to
get the succinate release.
So if you want to get your body heat,
your thermogenic level to go up,
you need to shiver.
So now we have the NEAT,
the non-exercise activity thermogenesis.
So low levels of activity
as I described before,
which are done away from cold,
maybe do them in cold as well.
As well as shiver in response to cold.
And so the shiver itself is valuable
for triggering the release of succinate.
In fact, succinate is being evolved now
by various drug manufacturers
as a potential treatment for obesity.
Although it hasn't really hit the market
in its final form yet.
Succinate is powerful for
its effects on brown fat.
So how many times a week do you need
to expose yourself to cold?
Will depend on how much
fat you're trying to lose,
and how much you're trying
to increase your metabolism.
There are studies that describe
positive effects on fat loss
of exposing yourself to cold,
either through cold
shower or through ice bath
or other cold water.
It doesn't have to
actually have ice in it,
provided it's cold enough
for anytime, anywhere,
excuse me, between one
and five times per week.
But it turns out that
just one exposure per week
can be valuable.
The question then is how long to get
into that cold environment?
And how cold should that environment be?
So first let's talk about how long
to get into that cold environment?
The answer here might be
a little bit different
than you might imagine.
Most of you might think,
oh, well if one minute is
good, three minutes is better,
and if three minutes is better
than 10 minutes is best.
But remember the goal is
to get the shiver induced
release of succinate,
so that succinate can
trigger the brown fat.
It turns out that if you
want to trigger the shiver,
what you want to do is
to get into the cold
and then get out of the cold
and typically not dry off,
and then get back into the
cold and out of the cold,
that will definitely
stimulate more shivering
than just getting into the cold itself.
So what I'm not referring to,
is getting into the cold
environment like an ice bath
and waiting until you shiver
and staying there shivering.
Okay?
You also don't want to get hypothermic.
And I want to be clear.
You want to get approval from your doctor
before you do any of this.
When you get into cold water,
there are two factors that will dictate
whether or not you shiver.
Probably three,
but let's just talk about the main two.
One, is how cold it is.
So how cold should it be?
And look, if you get into
water, that's very, very cold.
It can actually shock your heart.
It can actually give you a heart attack
if it's truly, truly ice cold,
and you're not adapted to that.
So proceed with caution, please.
I'm not a physician and I don't
want to see anyone get hurt.
Just cold enough to be uncomfortable
is a good place to start.
So for some of you that's
going to be 60 degrees,
for some of you that's
going to be 55 degrees,
for some of you it's going
to be high thirties, right?
Depends on how cold adapted you are,
and people vary in terms of how
well they tolerate the cold.
So what you need to do
is find a temperature
that you can get into one to five,
probably one to three times a week.
If you really want this
to accelerate fat loss.
And you want to get in until
you just start to shiver,
and then you want to
get out and not dry off,
wait anywhere from one to three minutes
and then get back into the cold.
Now, you'll notice when
you get back into the cold,
it'll almost seem soothing,
it might actually not induce shiv...
It might take away the
shiver that you had.
So here's a potential
kind of sets reps protocol
that you can play with.
Find a temperature then
induce a shiver for you.
That's going to vary depending
on your cold tolerance
and how cold adapted you are.
One to three,
maybe five times a week,
get in until you...
Or get under the shower or whatever it is,
until you start to shiver.
Genuinely shiver.
Then after about a minute or so, get out,
spend one to three minutes
out, but don't dry off,
get back in for anywhere
from one to three minutes,
but try and access the shiver point again.
And you might do three
repetitions of that.
So it's three times in
and three times out total.
Okay?
That's a great starting place.
And what you don't want to
do is build up your tolerance
to cold so fast,
that pretty soon you're
able to resist the shiver,
because remember the shiver
is the source of the succinate release
that will trigger brown fat thermogenesis.
So if you'd like to see
this protocol spelled out,
you can access it zero cost at a website
which is www.thecoldplunge.com.
The Cold Plunge is a company
they make cold plunges,
and they were kind enough to gift one
to the Human Lab Podcast.
But I want to emphasize that
these protocols are free of cost.
The folks at the Cold Plunge
are not just interested
in marketing their product,
but one of their main
interests is encouraging people
to engage in cold exposure
for particular end points
and goals like fat loss,
resilience, et cetera.
Resisting inflammation.
But their main focus is
providing people protocols
and encouraging people to use
cold exposure of various kinds
not just through their products,
but through cold rivers
and jumps in the ocean
and things like cold showers,
whatever is most convenient
and accessible for various people.
And so we needed a place
where we could house
these protocols in a permanent way,
and not just for this episode.
But so what they've agreed to do is,
to post the protocols there,
they should be very easy
to find on their website.
This particular protocol we're referring
to as the fat loss optimization protocol
for lack of a better name.
And it's really grounded in how cold
it can be used to induce shiver.
And again, it doesn't really matter
how you're accessing that cold,
provided you access to the shiver,
and you're moving from
the cold environment
to a slightly warmer environment.
So getting out of the cold shower
or getting out of the ice bath, et cetera,
or out of the cold plunge,
and then back in.
Because it turns out that the cooling
and rewarming process of the
body is where shiver kicks in.
And so that's distinctly different
than just trying to get into the cold
and stay in the cold
for as long as possible.
And if you zoom out a little bit
and think about some examples in life,
you'll understand why
that must be the case.
For instance, people who do
a lot of cold water swims,
you have these polar bear clubs,
I think they call themselves.
They do these cold water swims.
I would sometimes see these
people swimming back and forth
to Alcatraz and stuff like
that, which it seems risky.
and they tell me it's very stimulating
for the mind and body.
Great.
Sometimes those people are very lean,
oftentimes they're not,
and they're getting a
lot of cold exposure.
And one of the things that happens is,
if you expose yourself
to cold over and over,
you adapt,
you become cold adapted.
And when you do that,
you no longer get the epinephrine,
the adrenaline release from the cold
and therefore you don't
get the succinate release
and the shivering and the
brown fat thermogenic effect
quite as intensely.
So if you want to use
cold for other reasons,
and certainly cold water swims can be fun.
And there's, you know, long
as you can do them safely,
they're great.
I've gotten into cold water swimming
for some period of time.
You can use cold for
resilience, et cetera.
But if you want to use
cold to increase fat loss,
then getting this shiver
process going the cooling
and rewarming which
accelerates the amount of,
or increases the amount of shiver.
That's going to be the way to go.
One note about cold
and some of the factors
that it releases.
A few years back there
was a lot of excitement
about this hormone called
irisin, I-R-I-S-I-N,
which was associated with cold.
And there was a lot of excitement
about its potential role
in increasing metabolism
so much so that people
were starting to explore
this as a potential fat loss drug.
To my knowledge that went nowhere.
The science eventually
shifted over to succinate
as the main factor in
cold induced thermogenesis
through this brown fat pathway.
But if anyone out there is aware
of any positive effects of iricin
or of any signs of irisin
that I'm overlooking here,
or that I'm speaking about
incorrectly, please let me know.
I'd be very curious to learn.
Now, I want to just talk about
brown fat a little bit more,
and talk about a period in your life
in which you were rich with brown fat,
you had a ton of brown fat,
and that's when you were a baby.
Babies can't shiver.
These neurons that release
epinephrin into fat
are not wired up and really aren't present
at sufficient levels or
in sufficient numbers
when you are a baby.
And therefore you can't shiver as a baby,
and you can't warm yourself
up in cold environments
very well.
To compensate for that,
mother nature installed in all of us
an excess of brown fat early in life
that exists again in the upper back,
and the middle of the back
and the back of the neck.
Over time if we don't expose
ourselves to cold environments
or do other things that make a shiver,
we lose a lot of that brown fat,
but what's interesting about brown fat
is that there's some evidence
that brown fat just like white fat
can both increase in size,
but that you can also add new cells.
Now, there's a little bit controversial.
People always say you can't
change the number of fat cells,
you can just shrink them
or increase their size.
Well, it turns out that
epinephrin released
from these little nerve
endings in brown fat
and succinate circulating in the body may
and I want to underscore
may have the effect
of increasing the amount
of brown fat cells
probably by converting these
beige fat cells into brown fat.
So that allows us to become
much as we were early in life,
where we metabolized like crazy
and we'd heat ourselves
up without shivering.
Some people have taken the
cold thing to the extreme,
putting ice packs on
the back of their neck
throughout the day.
Did a episode all about
testosterone and estrogen,
and there's this, let's
just call it a very niche,
I have to imagine very,
very niche culture of people
who are wearing literally, I'm not joking.
They are these cool pack
ice pack underpants.
They go by a name that I'm
not going to repeat on here,
but you can find them on Amazon.
Those are people that are
using cold packs on the body
and on the groin to
try and increase things
like testosterone.
But as well to try and
increase thermogenesis
and trying to increase their metabolism.
Just remember if you become cold adapted,
you're not going to get
the fat burning effects
to the same degree.
So cold is a powerful tool for fat loss,
but you don't want to adapt.
This is reminiscent of a rule
that you hear about in endurance exercise
and in strength exercise as well,
which is, that you want to use
the minimal effective stimulus
to promote growth or progress.
So growth of a muscle or
improvements in endurance.
If you go 10% further
on a run or 10% faster,
you will likely see an
improvement in performance
provided your recovery the
next time you come back
and do that same round of exercise.
You'll be able to do more work
or complete the work
more easily, et cetera.
You've adapted.
If you do 20% more distance
or 20% more weight,
you won't necessarily see the same
commiserate level of gain or improvement.
And so likewise with cold,
if you're quickly moving
from 30 seconds of exposure
to 10 minutes of exposure,
you're overlooking the opportunity
to get the most fat loss
and increase in metabolism
by stepping it up
in smaller increments.
Okay?
And this also speaks to the rationale
for using cold exposure
to accelerate fat loss
for certain periods,
but then maybe not doing it year round.
If fat loss is your goal,
maybe use it for two,
three months at a time
and then stop for two,
three months at a time,
because it is such a potent stimulus
provided you engage in the shiver.
Next I'd like to move to exercise
and how particular timing
and types of exercise can
vastly improve fat loss.
Before I do that,
I just want to mention a
really important reference
for those of you that are
interested in learning more about
how neurons connect to fat?
This is certainly a paper
that you'd want to look at,
if you're interested in diving
deep into the literature
and reading all the various studies.
It's a review.
And the title of the review
is neural innervation
of white adipose tissue and
the control of lipolysis.
That's neural innervation
of white adipose tissue
and the control of lipolysis.
It was published in Frontiers
in Neuroendocrinology.
You can find that free online.
They have the full text available.
The first author is
Bartness, B-A-R-T-N-E-S-S.
It's a great review.
And I've talked about a number of things
that are mentioned in the review.
Follow the references in that review
and the reference trail as we say,
if you're interested
in learning more about
also how neurons control brown fat.
And before I moved to exercise,
I also just want to highlight something
that comes up every few years
and has largely been considered myth now,
but that is actually more interesting
than most people might think,
which is this issue of spot reduction.
You know, in the 80s and 90s,
there were a lot of commercials,
late night infomercials,
where they would talk
about spot reduction.
If you do sit ups, will
you lose abdominal fat?
If you do hip raises or glute raises,
will you lose gluten hip fat.
And I think everybody
knows now believes that,
and understands that fat metabolism
is something that happens
systemically throughout the body.
That some body fat is
quote unquote more stubborn
than others.
Everyone varies in where
they tend to store fat
or lose fat last.
Number of factors that influence that,
and in particular hormone receptors.
But now at least in the
scientific literature,
spot reduction and the possibility of real
true spot reduction reductions
in fat in a targeted way,
a body part or body area targeted way
is becoming more of a reality
and may be a reality soon,
because exercise that
triggers the activation
of these nerve fibers,
these neurons that innervate fat.
In theory, if you can increase
the amount of epinephrin
released at those particular
fat pads as they're called,
they're actually called fat pads
in the scientific literature.
In theory, you could increase mobilization
from those particular body fat sites.
Okay?
So because the new view that
the modern understanding
is that it's not adrenaline
released systemically
kind of bathing all your fat tissue,
but rather its neurons
releasing adrenaline
epinephrin locally that in theory,
exercise that stimulates
the release of epinephrin
or exercise coupled
with things like shiver
or low grade shaking movement,
or the NEAT, the non-exercise
activity thermogenesis
could in theory lead to local enhancement
of mobilization of fat tissue.
So I think that spot reduction
actually will soon be
something that's possible
using the appropriate technology.
What does this mean for you now?
What could you possibly do
with this information now?
Well, I think it speaks to the fact
that if one is going to engage in exercise
that doing exercises that involve
lots of different body parts and movements
is likely to encourage the maintenance
and or growth of these neurons
that innervate fat throughout the body.
What this means is changing
up the pattern of exercise,
engaging in novel types of movements
may actually be one
way that one can access
these so-called stubborn body fat pads.
Now, there's a little bit of speculation
in the statement that I'm making,
but if you think about it it makes sense.
If you become very adapted
to a particular pattern
of exercise,
whether or not you're subcaloric or not,
you're on maintenance calories are not,
you are oxidizing some fat always,
and you're utilizing the
neurons that innervate fat
in a regular way.
And pretty soon this innervation
is going to shut off,
because there's no reason why
this neural innervation of fat
should continue to release epinephrin
unless you give it a
strong stimulus like cold
or the fidgeting or in this case
to do novel forms of exercise.
And there's some anecdotal evidence
and I don't even want to call it data,
but anecdotal evidence
that people who have,
quote on quote stubborn body fat,
if they start to adopt
new patterns of exercise,
they can start to access
those stubborn fat pads.
And again, fat pads is the correct way
to refer to these in the
scientific literature.
So what we're focusing
on today is the fact
that fat indeed will be
mobilized and oxidized
in response to a deficit in calories.
But that the way that neurons
control those fat pads
and those body fat stores,
affords you a lot more control
than perhaps you ever previously thought.
So let's talk about movement.
And the more traditional
kinds of movement,
aka exercise has been
shown to lead to increases
in metabolism and fat
loss to greater degrees
depending on whether or not for,
instance you're fasted
when you do it or not,
whether or not you do your cardio first
or your resistance training first.
And this is again in the literature
for which there's a lot of controversy,
but in digging through
all the studies on this,
we're finally starting to
arrive at a consensus of,
when is best to do exercise?
And what types of exercise to
do if your goal is fat loss?
The topic of exercise is a
kind of controversial one,
not as controversial as nutrition and diet
which we will talk about in a few minutes.
But it's a particularly interesting one,
because different types
of exercising gauge
the musculature of the body
and the heart and the lungs
in different ways,
and can have vastly
different effects on things
like hormones and metabolism
depending on whether
or not it's of high intensity,
moderate intensity or low intensity.
So rather than think about weight training
versus cardiovascular exercise,
I think the most simple way,
the most fluid way to have this
conversation about exercise
and fat loss is in terms of
three general types of training.
Whether or not it's done
with weights or body weight
doesn't really matter.
And those are high
intensity interval training.
Something that's seems to have
gained a lot of popularity
in recent years.
So-called HITT, H-I-I-T.
So high intensity interval training.
Sprint interval training.
So that's going to be very
high intensity or SIT,
or moderate intensity
continuous training, M-I-C-T.
So we've got HIIT, SIT and MICT, M-I-C-T.
And we can get a little bit
more precise if you'd like.
I'm not somebody who measures
my VO2 max or anything
while I exercise.
I generally know whether
or not I'm doing something
I could continue for a very long time,
or whether or not I'm doing something
that I realize is going
to be of short duration
high-intensity.
But if you'd like to
map this to VO2 max SIT,
this sprint interval training was defined
as all out greater than 100% of VO2 max
bursts of activity that
lasts eight to 30 seconds
intersperse with less
intense recovery periods.
So this would be sprinting downfield
for eight to 30 seconds,
then maybe walking back
for about a minute or two
and then sprinting again
and then continuing.
So that would be SIT.
HIIT, H-I-I-T is defined as submaximal,
so 80 to a hundred percent
of VO2 max bursts of activity
that lasts 60 to 240 seconds
intersperse with less
intense recovery periods.
So on a standard 400 meter track,
just to give this a
little bit of a visual,
a four minute mile would be
fantastic for most people,
although people run faster
than that of course.
So that's four 60 seconds laps,
but that's back to back to back.
I think in my best shape or
maybe it was in my dreams,
I don't recall which I
was able to do 60 seconds
around the track,
but of course I couldn't
get that on the second
or third or fourth if I
did that was certainly
in the fantasy land and not reality.
But 60 seconds would
be about one revolution
around the track,
maybe 90 seconds, depending
on how fast a one is running.
So 60 to 240 seconds.
MICT okay.
This moderate intensity
continuous training
is steady state cardio
sometimes called Zone 2 cardio
these days on the internet,
which has performed continuously
for 20 to 60 minutes
at moderate intensity
of 40 to 60% of VO2 max
or if you prefer heart rate
55 to 70% of max heart rate.
Okay?
So we can think about high, medium
and low intensity exercise.
Although low intensity usually means
that you could carry on a conversation,
or maybe you have to gasp
every few steps or so,
while trying to talk and run.
That's I think going to
be the most useful way
to have this conversation
that we're having now,
because there's so many
different forms of exercise
that people do and intensity is important.
Let's ask the question
that I think many people
are wondering about,
which is, is it better?
Meaning do you burn more fat
if you do your exercise fasted?
And fasted in this respect
could be that you wake up
in the morning,
you've been fasting all night,
you just hydrate and you exercise
or sometimes people will ingest caffeine,
there's controversy as to whether
or not that quote on quote
breaks the fast.
It has to do with whether
or not your caffeine adapted
something for another episode.
In any case that would be fasted.
So probably not having eaten anything
for anywhere from three to
24 hours or maybe even more.
As you could also be
fasted in the afternoon.
If you had lunch at noon and it's four
or five or 6:00 p.m.
Is it, will you burn more fat
if you exercise without
an eating anything first,
without ingesting any calories first?
And people have tried to
really split hairs on this,
every which way people say,
well, you can fat fast,
because fat and protein doesn't lead
to as great increases in
insulin as other things,
maybe you can have a few
almonds and then still train.
And indeed insulin will
prevent fat oxidation.
I want to be really clear.
The burning part of fat in the cell,
the movement of the fatty
acid and into mitochondria
and the conversion ATP,
insulin inhibits that process.
However, it's been shown
that it least for short
periods of training,
it doesn't really seem to
matter whether or not you eat
before training or you don't,
if your goal is fat oxidation.
Now, I want to put an asterix near that,
because there are some exceptions.
But there were several studies done that,
and the kind of the classic ones of these,
I'll read out to you.
What they basically did is they
gave people glucose, sugar,
to increase their blood
sugar before training or not.
And the kind of classic study
of this is Al Borg at all.
So in 1976, so it goes way back,
which is that glucose reduces
fat burning and exercise.
And then some other studies
if you want to look these up,
they're very easy to find on PubMed.
You put in Horowitz 1999,
[indistinct] is another
one where they have people
drink milk with glucose in it.
So sweet sugary milk
before exercise, et cetera.
And you can find a number of examples
where eating before exercise
reduces the amount of fat
that's oxidized during the exercise.
And you can also find a lot
of studies showing that,
eating during exercise
or prior to exercise
will not reduce the amount
of fat that is oxidized.
However, the types of exercise
whether I was medium
intensity or high intensity
or low intensity is all over
the map for these studies.
So it's very hard to
target an ideal protocol.
And then if you look really
deep in the literature,
you start to find meta analysis
where people have actually
aggregated all the findings
and some modern studies where it points
to some very specific
and useful protocols.
And so here's the rule
that or the protocol
that I extracted from that literature.
At a period of about 90 minutes
of moderate intensity exercise,
I want to be clear,
at about or after 90 minutes
of moderate intensity exercise.
There's a switchover point
whereby if you ate before the exercise,
you will reduce, excuse me,
you will burn far less fat
from the 90 minute point onward
than you would if you had
gone into the training fasted.
So let me repeat that.
If it's moderate intensity,
so-called zone two cardio type exercise,
at the 90 minute point,
if you happen to have
eaten before the exercise
within one to three hours
prior to the exercise,
then you reduce the amount
of fat that you will burn
from 90 minutes onward,
whereas if you had fasted
prior to the exercise,
you hadn't eaten anything
for three hours or more prior
to the exercise.
At the 90 minute point,
90 minutes of exercise
you will start to burn
more fat than you would
had you eaten.
Now, 90 minutes of moderate
intensity exercises is a lot.
So that's a pretty long run.
Even if you're running
at a pretty slow pace
like a 10 or 12 minute mile,
that's a lot of running,
that's a lot of swimming.
So that's a lot of walking,
that's a lot of hiking.
However, there are people who
are going out hiking all day
or running all day or walking all day.
And if you want to burn
more fat per unit time,
you want to oxidize more fat
then you would do that fasted.
Now, there are also studies
that pointed the fact
that you don't have to wait to 90 minutes
in order to get this
enhanced fat burning effect.
The studies I was able to find
and that looked to me like
quality peer-reviewed studies
with no company bias or no
product bias of any kind.
These are studies that were largely funded
by the federal government
in the university context
pointed the fact that if one
does high-intensity training,
or even the very high
intensity forms of training
like sprints or squats or deadlifts
or any kind of activity
that can't be maintained
for more than these, you know, eight
or I would say up to 60 seconds.
So a set of lifting
weights repeated, repeated,
if that's done for
anywhere from 20 minutes,
so weight training or power lifting
or these kinds of things
or kettlebell swings
or up to 60 minutes,
we'll then the switchover point
in which you can burn more fat,
if you go into that fasted comes earlier.
And this makes sense
because there's nothing holy
about the 90 minute point
for a medium intensity
Zone 2 cardio.
That 90 minute point is the point
in which the body shifts over
from mainly burning glycogen,
basically, sugar that comes
from muscles or the liver
and realizes this is going on for a while,
I'm going to shift over
to a storage site fuel
that is in reserve like body fat.
This is going to happen for a while,
so I'm going to start
tapping into body fat stores.
Now, fat doesn't have
a little brain there.
It is innervated by neurons,
but it doesn't have thoughts.
And you don't actually control
this switch with your mind.
This is something that
has to do with the milieu
of various hormones.
What has to happen is insulin
has to go down far enough.
So if you ate before the exercise,
you'd have an increase in insulin,
if you ate carbohydrates
you'd have a bigger increase
in insulin, fat and proteins
indeed you'll have
lower amounts of insulin
and fasting will give you
the lowest amount of insulin.
Well, then that switch over
point is going to come earlier
in the exercise.
And if you think about if
you were to do something
high intensity for 20, 30, 40 minutes,
so maybe lift weights and
then get into Zone 2 cardio.
If you are fasted, the literature says
that you're going to burn
more body fat per unit time
than if you had eaten before
or during the exercise.
So what does this mean?
This means if you want
to burn more body fat,
if it's in your protocols
and you have been approved
to do this safely,
exercise intensely for 20 to 60 minutes,
the higher the intensity
obviously the shorter
that about is going to be,
and then move over into Zone 2 cardio.
And if you do that fasted or
the medium intensity cardio
I should say.
And if you do that fasted,
then indeed you will burn a
higher percentage of body fat.
If you need to eat or you
like to eat before you train
that also can work.
And if you train very intensely,
you're likely to shift over
to the fat burning pattern
more quickly as well.
So again, this isn't really an issue
of how long you exercise.
It's an issue of how
intensely you exercise
and therefore what fuel
source you're drawing from.
So hopefully I've made that clear,
but basically you need to deplete glycogen
or through high intensity exercise
and then move to a steady state exercise
that will allow you to burn more fat.
Or you need to perform a medium intensity
or low intensity type exercise
for a long period of time
before you shift over to burning fat.
And indeed it seems that
going into all that fasted
will facilitate the burning
of more fat overall.
But if you can't even get to the exercise,
if you're somebody who just
can't do the training at all,
you're unwilling to or
you're incapable of training,
unless you eat something,
then obviously eating
something makes the most sense.
And what you eat prior to exercise,
that's a whole other biz
that people argue about
and fight about whether
or not you should go
into it with low carbohydrates
or higher carbs, all of that.
But in general, the theme
there is very simple.
Which is that you want insulin
levels to be pretty low
if your goal is body fat reduction,
if you want to oxidize body fat.
So fasting in some cases,
fat fasting and other cases
where you're just ingesting fats.
Fat and protein, in some
cases or for some people
it will be eating carbohydrates.
I'm not here to dictate a
particular nutrition regimen.
That's just how the hormone
balance of these things
and fat oxidation works.
Now, one thing that's very interesting
and cannot be overlooked is this issue
of how much energy you burn
during and after the activity.
And some of you probably
already know about this,
but the whole business of
calories in versus calories out,
and people counting the number of calories
they burn during their aerobic session
or during their whatever session
is only one half of the equation
and it really eclipses
the more important issue,
which is how much of an
increase in metabolism
does a given exercise
create after the exercise?
And we could talk for hours about this,
but the simple way to view this is that,
high intensity training,
anaerobic training
of weight training, sprints,
burpees, any kind of thing.
I don't know these days I
hear that you're not supposed
to do burpees that people
think burpees are dangerous.
So I'm not suggesting any
particular movements here.
You have to decide what's right for you.
I do burpees.
I don't seem to be injured from them,
but I hear that they're
terrible for some people.
So anyway, push-ups, sit-ups,
whatever it happens to be
that anaerobic exercise
that's of higher intensity or sprints
taps into glycogen stores
during the movement
and we'll burn more energy per unit time
than moderate intensity.
High intensity burns more
than modern intensity.
That's straightforward.
What's interesting is that all the studies
that I was able to find on what happens
after that type of exercise showed
that the percentage of fat that you burn
after high intensity
exercise is actually greater.
In other words, you burn a lot of glycogen
during the high intensity exercise.
And then after the exercise,
the post exercise oxygen consumption
as it sometimes called goes up.
We know this after you train intensely
that post exercise oxygen
consumption goes up
sometimes for up to 24 hours.
And it is during that period of time
that you oxidize more fat not glycogen.
Now, what's interesting is
that the reverse is also true,
for people that do long bouts of low
or moderate intensity exercise.
So typically this would
be things like running,
swimming, biking, et cetera.
So 60, 90 minutes, two hours
maybe even people that
are training for marathons
or half marathons,
when they stop training,
they burn more glycogen,
more carbohydrate,
even though they were burning
more body fat per unit time
during the low intensity exercise.
So there's this kind of inversion.
High-intensity burns more
glycogen during the activity,
more body fat afterwards.
Moderate to low intensity
burns more percentage-wise
more body fat is oxidized than glycogen
during the actual exercise
afterward it's more glycogen.
So I don't want this
to get too complicated.
The point is you should
pick exercise that you like,
that you're going to do regularly,
but it does seem that the
high intensity exercise
followed by moderate intensity exercise
is going to be optimal
for fat burning overall.
Because when you look at the
percentage of body fat burned,
and you look at the overall increase
in basal metabolic rate,
moderate and high intensity training
followed by low intensity training
or even just followed
by going back into life
is going to be the best way
to continue to burn body fat
because of the ways that it
increases basal metabolic rate.
This could be distilled
into a simple protocol
whereby three or four times a week
you do high intensity training
followed by either nothing
or followed by low intensity training
especially if you're
able to do that fasted.
And I should just mention
that none of this stuff
about fasted is about performance.
If you want to perform really well,
this is for reasons of performance
and you want to, you know, it's
for a sport or a competition,
it's not for body fat purposes.
Well, then all of this kind of falls away
and is modified by what's
ideal to eat for performance.
But what we're talking about today
is how to optimize body fat loss.
So train moderately to very high intensity
and then moderate to low intensity,
or train moderate to high intensity,
and then go about life.
And in fact, I have a friend
who uses this strategy.
He likes the train intensely
and not that often protocol
cause he's a very busy person.
So he'll train for 20
or 30 minutes intensely
with weights or just body
weight movement doing a lot,
he does burpees and push-ups
and sit-ups and pull-ups
and just kind of moving and
kind of circuit type training.
But where he's breathing really hard,
the goal he always says is,
I want to breathe hard
for 30 minutes every day.
And then afterwards he
hydrates and drinks coffee
and moves into his day.
And he's walking around and taking calls
and carrying around his children
and doing all these kinds of things
that keep him really busy
which is kind of like low intensity work.
So I think you get the principle now.
But you should all be asking yourselves
as scientists of yourselves.
Why would it be that
certain patterns of exercise
would lead to more or less fat loss?
I mean, it can't just be
about the energy burn.
We already established that.
And again, it has to do with the neurons.
It has to do with how we
engage the nervous system.
So while non-exercise activity
induced thermogenesis, NEAT,
the fidgeting and cold
can induce thermogenesis
by engaging shiver tight
movement or low-level movements.
Big movements that are
of very high intensity,
meaning they require a lot of effort,
deploy a lot of adrenaline
epinephrin from our neurons
and signal particular types
and amounts of fat
thermogenesis, fat oxidation,
whereas low level intensity exercise,
low or moderate intensity exercise,
walking, running, biking
where you can do that easily,
there's not very much adrenaline release.
So adrenaline aka epinephrin
is really the final common path
by which movement of any kind,
whether or not it's low level shiver,
whether or not it's lifting
a barbell sprinting up a hill
or doing a long bike ride.
Adrenaline is the effector of fat loss.
It's the trigger end, it's the effector.
So now I want to turn our
attention to compounds
that increase epinephrin and adrenaline,
as well as compounds that work outside
the adrenaline epinephrin pathway
to increase the rates of fat loss.
I almost always save
compounds and supplements
and things of that sort to the end,
because I do believe that
people should look first
towards behavioral tools and
an understanding of the science
before they look toward a supplement
or a particular thing that
they can extract from diet.
This is mainly to try
and shift people away
from the kind of magic
pill phenomenon or the idea
that there is a magic pill
because there really isn't.
And frankly, there never will be.
But there are some compounds
that can greatly increase fat
oxidation and mobilization.
And understanding which
compounds increase oxidation
or mobilization can be very useful
if your goal is to accelerate fat loss.
There are things that people can ingest
that will allow them to oxidize more fat.
And that occurs mainly
by increasing the amount
of epinephrin that is
released from neurons
that innovate fat tissue.
One of the more common ones is one
that you may already be
using which is caffeine.
It's well-established that
caffeine can enhance performance,
if you're caffeine adapted.
I talked about this in an earlier episode
so I want to make sure
I'm very clear about this.
If you are not used to drinking caffeine
and you suddenly decide I'm going to drink
a big cup of coffee before training,
you will vasoconstrict and
you will limit performance.
So that's performance.
If you're caffeine adapted however,
there's this kind of
interesting phenomenon
where ingestion of caffeine
serves more as a performance enhancer,
both by increasing alertness,
but also by way of dilating vasculature
of allowing more blood flow.
Now, caffeine for burning
more fat for oxidizing
and mobilizing more fat
is an interesting one.
It can be effective at
dosages up to 400 milligrams.
You have to be careful if
you're caffeine sensitive.
Some people have just the
littlest bit of caffeine
and their mind goes crazy,
and they're very uncomfortable.
It can have cardiovascular
effects for some people
or hypertension, et cetera.
So please check with your doctor.
But 400 milligrams is roughly
a cup and a half a coffee
or two cups of coffee.
Nowadays, there's a lot
more caffeine in coffee.
So if you go to a typical cafe
and you were to get their medium-sized
that would have close
to a gram of caffeine,
which is why, if you're a
regular caffeine consumer
and you don't get that gram of caffeine
in your coffee each day,
you will get a headache.
It can cause constriction
and dilation of blood vessels
in ways that's complicated,
but you'll get a headache.
Some people like the
way they feel drinking
100 to 200, 300 maybe 400
milligrams of caffeine
before training.
And indeed that will lead
to increase fat oxidation.
It will do that because you
will release more epinephrin
and adrenaline.
So let's just place this in the context
of what we said previously.
Let's say you normally do Zone 2 cardio,
so you're going out for
a moderately intense run
for 30 to 60 minutes or so.
I think the current recommendation
guidelines in the States
are that people engage in 30 minutes
of moderate intensity
exercise five days a week
for that's 150 minutes.
If their goal is to improve
or maintain health of the
cardiovascular system.
80% of people in the United
States fail to do that,
or anything close to it.
We are way below threshold
for what the government
has recommended.
In this case, the
government recommendations,
I think are pretty good.
That's one could always
do better of course.
But 80% of people aren't even doing that.
However, just using the logic
and the understanding of
how epinephrin adrenaline
is affecting this fat oxidation process.
If you were to go out for 15 minutes
and you drank caffeine before you went,
yes, you'll probably oxidize
more fat per unit time.
Can you compensate for the exercise
you're not doing just
by drinking caffeine?
Well, probably if you were
just talking about fat loss,
if that caffeine makes
you fidget a lot, right?
The amount of calories that
you burn in a 30 minute run,
unless the run is very intense
and you're wearing a weight
vest and it's up a hill,
it's not that great, right?
Then you probably get you in somewhere
into the 400, 500 calories burned area.
But I said earlier, and
there are a lot of data now
to support that fidgeting for a day
can burn anywhere from 800
to 2,500 calories a day.
So you might say, well,
fidgeting is better than running,
ah, but it doesn't trigger the activation
and the positive health effects
of the cardiovascular system.
So fidgeting alone can be great,
but you need exercise for other reasons.
Caffeine can enhance the amount of fat
that you burn in any duration of exercise.
And it can shift the percentage of fat
that you oxidize compared to glycogen.
Unless you take that caffeine
and it ramps you up so much
that you're training
really, really intensely.
The bottom line is,
if you like caffeine and
you can use it safely,
ingesting somewhere between
104 milligrams of caffeine
prior to exercise somewhere
between 30 to 40 minutes
before exercise can be beneficial
if we're talking about fat
oxidation burning more body fat.
So that's caffeine.
There are a number of other things
that have existed over the
years that are in this pathway,
things like ephedrine which
is now illegal in most states,
I think maybe an all states
because people were dropping
dead from taking ephedrine,
because they were heating up too much.
It's interesting it wasn't
direct effects on the heart
causing heart attack.
It could trigger by way
of adrenergic receptors.
If you'd like to know,
increases in body temperature and heat.
Now, those drugs turned
out to be dangerous,
because people were overheating and dying.
There was also the big Fen-Phen craze.
That was a drug that was
released fenfluramine
which actually was quite effective
as an anti obesity drug,
a treatment for obesity that
had to be outlawed as well.
It was FDA approval was removed
because again people were dying
because of cardiovascular effects.
I don't know if people were
overheating on it as well.
So what is the solution?
If caffeine is the kind of the
entry point for most people
of using compounds to increase the rate
or percentage of fat loss in
exercise and even at rest,
what are some of the other
things that are useful
and interesting?
Well, in terms of tools
that are actionable
and have reasonable safety margins,
I've talked before about
something called GLP-1.
This is something that can be triggered
by the ingestion of yerba
mate, which is a tea,
and I guess because I'm half Argentine,
we grew up drinking mate.
I think I was drinking mate from the time
I was about three or four years old.
I don't suggest that for kids.
I don't think kids should
be ingesting caffeine.
But anyway I did it and
I still ingest mate.
Mate increases GLP-1.
GLP-1 is in the glucagon pathway.
So let's just quickly
return to our biochemistry.
As you recall, fat is
mobilized from body fat stores
and then it's burned up.
It's oxidized in cells.
It actually needs to
be converted into ATP.
And those fatty acids are
essentially converted into ATP
in the mitochondria of the cell.
High insulin prevents that from happening
and glucagon facilitates that process.
Glucagon facilitates that process
through increases in GLP-1.
The short takeaway is mate increases GLP-1
and yes, increases the percentage
of fat that you will burn.
It increases fat burning.
And that is especially true,
it turns out from the
scientific literature,
if you ingest mate prior
to exercise of any kind.
So if you want to burn
more fat drinking mate
before exercise is good.
Drinking it at rest when
you're not exercising
will also help shift your metabolism
toward enhanced burning of fat
by increasing fat oxidation.
Now, there's a whole
category of pharmaceuticals
that's being developed right now
that are in late stage trials
or are in use for the
treatment of diabetes
which capitalize on this GLP-1 pathway.
They go by various names
and there are people on the internet
who are selling these things.
They are prescription drugs
and I want to emphasize that
they are prescription drugs
and you obviously wouldn't want to use
any of these without a
prescription and a requirement.
It does seem that they are effective
for the treatment of
certain kinds of diabetes
and lead to fairly significant weight loss
and reduction in appetite.
So this is kind of the
modern version of GLP-1
is pharmaceuticals of GLP-1 metabolism
are drugs such as somatical,
I can never pronounce this.
I can't seem to pronounce
many things it seems.
Semaglutide is the way
I would pronounce it.
S-E-M-A-G-L-U-T-I-D-E.
Semaglutide but that's not
the way you pronounce it.
But Semaglutide is the way
that it's been described
on the internet.
In any case, this
compound increases GLP-1.
It's actually a GLP-1
analog in some cases,
and they go by various
types of trade names.
So the GLP-1 pathway is interesting.
Most people, including myself,
are not interested in
taking a prescription drug
to increase GLP-1,
I do it through the ingestion of mate.
I just get the mate leaves,
pour water over it and drink it.
What's kind of interesting,
that's not often discussed
is that you can increase
the amount of GLP-1 by,
you can essentially reuse the tea.
The first time you drink it
it can be very, very intense.
And in fact, some people find that mate
almost tastes like burnt leaves.
It's too intense.
You don't want the water to be too hot.
But I learned this trick from a friend.
You can reuse the leaves
over and over again,
probably for about a
day before they go bad.
And in doing that, you start
to extract more and more
of the compounds from the mate
leaf that increased GLP-1.
So it's kind of cool.
You can kind of get an increased effect.
So what I'll typically do is
make a about 16 to 30 ounces
and just sip it throughout the day,
and I do like it before I train.
Some people who don't like mate
might prefer something like guayusa,
which is spelled G-U-A-Y-U-S-A.
G-U-A-Y-U-S-A, guayusa
which is from Ecuador,
despite the USA ending to it.
It's from Ecuador.
And it's a sweeter tasting tea.
It doesn't have any sweetener in it,
but the leaf of the
guayusa plant is sweeter
than the mate plant.
I sometimes will mix the two
and then make the tea with that.
There's no mate or guayusa
sponsor of the podcast.
These are just tools to increase
GLP-1 and fat oxidation.
And again, the Semaglutide
is the prescription version
of the that's kind of the heavy
artillery GLP-1 stimulant,
and again should be only
explored with a prescription.
So those are the compounds
that really increase
fat oxidation directly.
There are going to be a number
of things that impact insulin
and glucagon that are
going to shift the body
toward more fat burning.
We talked about a lot of
these during the episode
on hormones.
We talked about it.
We did a whole episode on
hormones and metabolism.
And so for instance, berberine,
which comes from a plant
or metformin are compounds
that are now in kind of growing use
for reducing blood glucose.
They are very potent at
reducing blood glucose,
which will reduce insulin because the job
of the hormone insulin is to
essentially manage glucose
in the bloodstream.
So there are a huge gallery of compounds
that will reduce insulin
and thereby can increase fat oxidation.
And that's because, as I mentioned before,
fat oxidation, this conversion
of fatty acids into ATP
in the mitochondria is
inhibited by insulin.
So if you keep insulin low,
you're going to increase that process.
Which brings us full circle back
to the issue of diet and nutrition.
There is really solid
evidence from the Gardner Lab
at Stanford and from
other labs showing that,
when you look at different diets,
you look at low fat diets,
high fat diets,
keto diets, intermittent fasting,
provided people stick to
their particular diet,
it doesn't really matter
which diet you follow.
You can still get a caloric deficit
and you get weight loss.
Adherence however is always an issue.
And so what I always say is,
that you want to use the eating plan
that is obviously
beneficial to your health,
but the one that allows you to adhere
to whatever it is that the
particular nutrition protocol is,
right?
If you can't stick with something,
then it's not very worthwhile.
But from the purely scientific standpoint,
there's also an advantage
to keeping insulin low.
Now, that doesn't necessarily mean
you go to zero carbohydrate.
I've talked before about
my preferred way of eating
is to go lower or no
carbohydrates throughout the day
for alertness to get that
adrenaline release and the focus
that goes with it, et cetera,
and the ability to think and move
and do all the things I
need to do during the day.
And then I eat carbohydrates at night
'cause it facilitates
the transition to sleep.
That's what works for me.
But when insulin is low,
you do place your system in a
position to oxidize more fat.
And so that's why I think a
lot of people do see benefit
from lower carbohydrate or
moderate carbohydrate diets,
because when insulin is low,
you are in a position to oxidize more fat.
Both from exercise and at rest.
And I should mention,
because I often mention
and it's appropriate to mention
that if you're interested
in looking at the effects
of caffeine, of mate,
guayusa things of that sort,
GLP-1 you want to learn more about those.
You can go to this wonderful website
which is free www.examine.com.
You can put in yerba mate,
it will describe the three studies
that show increased fat oxidation,
both during exercise and at rest,
and as a consequence not
surprisingly and increase
in metabolic rate.
One thing that's interesting about mate
is it causes a slight
decrease in heart rate
for reasons that still escape me.
There's a single study showing
that heart rate is slightly reduced
which is kind of nice because if,
when I drink too much caffeine
my heart rate goes up,
maybe that would increase my
fidgeting and my fat burning,
but I don't like the feeling
of having my basal heart rate
being up too high.
I like my heart rate
elevate during exercise,
but not when I'm just kind of resting
or working and throughout the day.
And for some reason
that I don't understand
there's an effect of mate
of increasing fat oxidation
but reducing heart rate just slightly.
So that's interesting.
And it probably lends itself [indistinct]
explains the subjective experience
that I've had of that mate
has kind of a little nice
even mellow stimulant.
It's not this really supercharged
stimulant like caffeine
from coffee or other sources.
Although if you drink too much mate
it will also make you jittery.
And there's one more compound
that I think we should discuss
in terms of increasing fat loss,
and that's carnitine
or acetyl-L-carnitine,
they lie in the same pathway.
We can return to our basic
knowledge now of fat mobilization
and oxidation.
After fat is mobilized
and makes it into cells
and needs to be oxidized.
So the literally the burning of fat
and conversion of it into energy
that is accomplished and is facilitated
by the presence of
glucagon being elevated,
GLP increases that process
and insulin being low.
And we talked about some
ways to manage insulin
both in this episode
and in previous episode.
L-carnitine and acetyl-L-carnitine
in particular facilitates fat oxidation.
It helps convert fatty acids into ATP.
And indeed supplementing
L-carnitine can increase fat loss.
That's been shown.
At what dosages?
Well, people ingest
anywhere from 500 milligrams
to two grams per day in
divided doses typically.
Some people who are really extreme
are taking injectable L-carnitine,
I've certainly not tried that.
I confess I have used it in
pill form from time to time
but in part, because of
the fat oxidation effects,
but also because of the other
effects that it tends to have.
So in exploring the effects
that acetyl-L-carnitine has,
it has a huge variety of
effects on cellar metabolism.
It can reduce ammonia in the blood
that is actually a quite strong effect.
It can reduce things
like C-reactive protein,
which is you want to
C-reactive protein levels
to be managed.
You do not want them too high.
Can slightly reduce blood glucose.
I can slightly increase HDLC,
the good form of the blood lipid
and slightly reduce overall cholesterol.
And as I mentioned, it can slightly modify
the pathway involving glucagon,
such that you get a considerable effect,
not a huge effect on fat oxidation,
so it can improve pat oxidation rates.
It has a number of other effects,
some of which I talked
during the month on hormones
and that sort of thing.
It has strong effects
on rates of pregnancy
and sperm quality.
So clearly carnitine is doing
lots of different things
and lots of different cells.
It's impacting sperm motility.
They're in a large number
of studies supporting that.
Slight reductions in blood pressure
and has these interesting
effects on reducing fatigue
during exercise,
reducing inflammatory
markers like interleukin 6.
So it has a number of
effects that on the whole
are quote unquote positive
or at least in the direction
of things that you may want.
And I should emphasize may.
You certainly don't need
a acetyl-L-carnitine
in order to lose fat,
but now that you understand
the cellular process
by which fat is mobilized and oxidized,
it should make sense that if L-carnitine
is important for converting
fatty acids into energy,
then supplementing L-carnitine make sense.
Acetyl-L-carnitine is
the type of L-carnitine
or the form of L-carnitine I should say,
that is transported and utilized
most easily by the body.
And so that's why sometimes we distinguish
between L-carnitine
and acetyl-L-carnitine.
So once again, we've covered
an enormous amount of material.
We've talked about the science of fat loss
and in particular, we've
explored this topic
from the perspective
of the nervous system.
How neurons and in particular
the release of things
like adrenaline, epinephrin
can facilitate fat mobilization
and oxidation.
We talked about NEAT, fidgeting,
this non-exercise type movement
that can greatly increase caloric burn.
And why that is.
We talked about shiver,
another form of non-exercise movement
that can really increase
both caloric expenditure
due to the shiver, due to the movement,
as well as increase thermogenesis
the heating up of the body
through things like brown fat,
and even the conversion
of white fat to brown fat
which is a good thing if
you want to oxidize fat.
We talked about cold as
a particular stimulus
to induce shiver and
how to use getting into,
an out of cold as a
way to stimulate shiver
and avoid cold adaptation
so that you continue
to oxidize and burn fat,
if that's your goal.
If you want to check out
the protocols for that,
there at www.thecoldplunge.com
and in weeks to come
we're going to be adding
more protocols to that website
not just for fat loss,
but for things like resilience,
reducing inflammation, et cetera.
So be sure to check those out again,
those are totally cost-free.
Talked about exercise.
How rather than thinking
about cardiovascular
or weight training exercise,
that we should perhaps
look through the lens
of this adrenaline system
and how it interacts
with fat stores and
think about low, medium
or high intensity exercise.
Whether or not we show
up to that fasted or not.
Turns out showing up to
that fasted can be useful,
if you start with high intensity movements
and then move into lower
intensity type exercise.
If you're going to go long duration,
it probably doesn't matter
unless you're exercising longer
than 90 minutes, whether
or not you eat or not.
We talked about caffeine as a stimulant
and a stimulus for epinephrin
and adrenaline release
as a way to access more fat metabolism.
And we talked about compounds
that come from things like
yerba mate and guayusa tea,
this GLP-1 pathway that can
trigger increased fat oxidation
so much so that the
pharmaceutical companies
are now developing compounds specifically
to increase GLP-1 for treatment
of diabetes and obesity.
But you can leverage the GLP-1 pathway
through the ingestion of things like mate
or guayusa if that's of interest to you.
And then we talked about L-carnitine
and how L-carnitine itself is critical
for the fat oxidation
within individual cells.
The conversion of fatty acids to energy.
And why having your insulin low
and things like L-carnitine
and glucagon levels
high or sufficient at least can facilitate
the burning of fat, fat oxidation.
So we covered a lot of material.
That's a lot of protocols
I realize that didn't...
The little list I just gave right there
didn't even begin to
get into all the details
and corners that we discussed.
I hope you found this
conversation interesting
both for sake of understanding fat loss
and how to lose fat more
quickly and to lose more of it,
if that's your goal.
As well as simply to
understand the biology
of fat metabolism from
a different perspective,
from the perspective
of the nervous system.
If you're enjoying this podcast
and you're benefiting from the information
that you're learning,
please subscribe on YouTube.
That really helps us a lot.
There's also a notifications
button that you can hit
that will notify you anytime
we release new content.
We release new episodes every Monday,
but sometimes we release
additional material in between.
So please do subscribe on YouTube.
As well if you could subscribe
on Apple and or Spotify
that's terrific and really helps us.
And at Apple, you can give
us a five star review.
If you think we deserve
a five-star review.
As well as you have the opportunity
to give us feedback at Apple.
The comment section on
YouTube is the place
to give us feedback whether
or not you like an episode,
whether or not you don't like an episode.
Aspects that you particularly liked,
suggestions for future content.
We do read, I do read
through all the comments.
It takes me some time.
I sometimes fall a little bit behind
depending on other duties,
but I read all the comments
and I do take them into account
when developing this material
and the structure of the material.
So please do provide feedback
in the comment section.
We really appreciate it.
Other ways to support the podcast
are to check out the sponsors
that we mentioned at the
beginning of the podcast.
That's a terrific way to support us.
As well we have a Patreon.
It's www.patreon.com/andrewhuberman.
And at Patreon that will allow
you to support the podcast
at any level that you like.
I've mentioned supplements
during the podcast.
If you're interested
in taking supplements,
you might want to check out Thorne.
T-H-O-R-N-E.
We've partnered with Thorne
because they have the
highest levels of stringency
in terms of the quality of
the ingredients they use,
and the amounts of the
ingredients that they use.
If you want to see the
supplements that I take,
you can go to Thorne,
thorne.com/u/huberman.
And you can get 20% off
any of the supplements
that are there,
as well as any of the
supplements that Thorne makes.
That's thorne.com/u/huberman
to get 20% off any of the
supplements that Thorne makes.
And last but not least,
I want to thank you for your
time and attention today.
And thank you for your
interest in science.
[upbeat music]